New tutorial for service and client using C++ (#370)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/WritingASimpleServiceAndClient(C++).rst

Writing a simple service and client (C++)
===============================================

**Goal:** Create and run service and client nodes using C++.

**Tutorial level:** Beginner

**Time:** 20 minutes

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Background
----------

When nodes communicate using :ref:`services <ROS2Services>`, the node that sends a request for data is called the client node, and the one that responds to the request is the service node.
The structure of the request and response is determined by a ``.srv`` file.

The example used here is a simple integer addition system; one node requests the sum of two integers, and the other responds with the result.

.. link nodes tutorial

Prerequisites
-------------

.. In previous tutorials, you learned how to :ref:`create a workspace <>` and :ref:`create a package <>`.

Tasks
-----

1 Create a package
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Open a new terminal and :ref:`source your ROS 2 installation <ConfigROS2>` so that ``ros2`` commands will work.

Navigate into the ``dev_ws`` directory created in a previous tutorial.

.. link

Recall that packages should be created in the ``src`` directory, not the root of the workspace.

> So, navigate into ``dev_ws/src``, and run the package creation command:

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr nit: consider 
```suggestion
Navigate into ``dev_ws/src`` and create a new package:
```

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 pkg create --build-type ament_cmake test --dependencies rclcpp example_interfaces

Your terminal will return a message verifying the creation of your package ``cpp_srvcli`` and all its necessary files and folders.

The ``--dependencies`` argument will automatically add the necessary dependency lines to ``package.xml`` and ``CMakeLists.txt``.

> ``example_interfaces`` is the `package <https://github.com/ros2/example_interfaces/blob/master/srv/AddTwoInts.srv>`__ that includes the .``srv`` file you will need to structure your requests and responses:

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr nit: maybe the link should be bound to `the .srv file` instead?

Reviewer: Also, it seems the dot was left out that inline literal block: .`srv` -> `.srv`

.. code-block::

    int64 a
    int64 b
    ---
    int64 sum

The first two lines are the parameters of the request, and below the dashes is the response.

1.1 Update ``package.xml``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Because you used the ``--dependencies`` option during package creation, you don’t have to manually add dependencies to ``package.xml`` or ``CMakeLists.txt``.

As always, though, make sure to add the description, maintainer email and name, and license information to ``package.xml``.

.. code-block:: xml

  <description>C++ client server tutorial</description>
  <maintainer email="you@email.com">Your Name</maintainer>

>   <license>Apache License 2.0</license>

Reviewer 2: Use a placeholder too for the license?

Author: In an earlier tutorial we tell them they can use any license, and that Apache is the one we usually use. I think because some people might not know what licenses to choose from it's less confusing

2 Write the service node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inside the ``dev_ws/src/cpp_srvcli/src`` directory, create a new file called ``add_two_ints_server.cpp`` and paste the following code within:

.. code-block:: c++

      #include "rclcpp/rclcpp.hpp"
      #include "example_interfaces/srv/add_two_ints.hpp"

      #include <memory>

      void add(const std::shared_ptr<example_interfaces::srv::AddTwoInts::Request> request,

>                 std::shared_ptr<example_interfaces::srv::AddTwoInts::Response>      response)

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr something's odd with the format here.

        rclcpp::Service<example_interfaces::srv::AddTwoInts>::SharedPtr service =
          node->create_service<example_interfaces::srv::AddTwoInts>("add_two_ints", &add);

        RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Ready to add two ints.");

        rclcpp::spin(node);
        rclcpp::shutdown();
      }

2.1 Examine the code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first two ``#include`` statements are your package dependencies.

The ``add`` function adds two integers from the request and gives the sum to the response, while notifying the console of its status using logs.

.. code-block:: c++

    void add(const std::shared_ptr<example_interfaces::srv::AddTwoInts::Request> request,
             std::shared_ptr<example_interfaces::srv::AddTwoInts::Response>      response)
    {
        response->sum = request->a + request->b;
        RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "Incoming request\na: %ld" " b: %ld",
            request->a, request->b);
        RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "sending back response: [%ld]", (long int)response->sum);
    }

The ``main`` function accomplishes the following, line by line:

> * Initializes ROS 2:

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr what about `Initializes ROS 2 C++ client library:` ? Just `ROS 2` is a bit broad.

The ``add_executable`` macro generates an executable you can run using ``ros2 run``.
Add the following code block to create an executable named ``server``:

.. code-block::

    add_executable(server src/add_two_ints_server.cpp)
    ament_target_dependencies(server
    rclcpp example_interfaces)

So ``ros2 run`` can find the executable, add the following lines to the end of the file, right before ``ament_package()``:

.. code-block::

    install(TARGETS
      server
      DESTINATION lib/${PROJECT_NAME})

You could build your package now, source the local setup files, and run it, but let’s create the client node first so you can see the full system at work.

3 Write the client node
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Inside the ``dev_ws/src/cpp_srvcli/src`` directory, create a new file called ``add_two_ints_client.cpp`` and paste the following code within:

.. code-block:: C++

    #include <chrono>
    #include <cstdlib>
    #include <memory>

    using namespace std::chrono_literals;

    int main(int argc, char **argv)
    {
      rclcpp::init(argc, argv);

      if (argc != 3) {
          RCLCPP_INFO(rclcpp::get_logger("rclcpp"), "usage: add_two_ints_client X Y");
          return 1;

>       }

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr meta: I just want to mention that this will break if any `--ros-args` are provided. Not sure whether these have been introduced by the time a reader gets here or not though.

Author: If any `--ros-args` are introduced where? When they `ros2 run` the node on the command line? I don't think `--ros-args` have been covered at this point; can you give me an example so I know for sure?

Author: @hidmic I just remembered what `--ros-args` does! So you can ignore that question. 
>  I just want to mention that this will break if any --ros-args are provided

I don't really want to put something like that in the tutorial. What does this `if` statement do? I removed it and the nodes still work

    colcon build --packages-select cpp_srvcli

Open a new terminal, navigate to ``dev_ws``, and source the setup files:

.. code-block:: bash

    . install/setup.bash

Now run the service node:

.. code-block:: bash

     ros2 run cpp_srvcli server

The terminal should return the following message, and then wait:

.. code-block::

    [INFO] [rclcpp]: Ready to add two ints.

Open another terminal, source the setup files from inside ``dev_ws`` again.
Start the client node, followed by any two integers separated by a space:

.. code-block:: bash

     ros2 run cpp_srvcli client 2 3

If you chose ``2`` and ``3``, for example, the client would receive a response like this:

.. code-block::

    [INFO] [rclcpp]: Sum: 5

Return to the terminal where your service node is running.
You will see that it published log messages when it received the request and the data it received, and the response it sent back:

.. code-block::

    [INFO] [rclcpp]: Incoming request
    a: 2 b: 3
    [INFO] [rclcpp]: sending back response: [5]

Enter ``Ctrl+C`` in the server terminal to stop the node from spinning.

Summary
-------

You created two nodes to request and respond to data over a service.

> You added their dependencies and executables to the package configuration files so that you could build and run them, and see a service/client system at work

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr 
```suggestion
You added their dependencies and executables to the package configuration files so that you could build and run them, and saw a service/client system at work
```
?

Author: The last clause is actually a continuation of the `build and run` (present tense) part, but you're right it could be mistaken for being a continuation of `added`

```suggestion
You added their dependencies and executables to the package configuration files so that you could build and run them, allowing you to see a service/client system at work.
```

Is that less confusing?
